6 sentence summary:
I want to write. But I’ve been putting it off. Why is that? Because because I’m afraid I won’t do the idea justice, because there is too much to write about and to explore, and because of my need to be accepted. But I should do it anyways because creating is one of the most worthwhile things we can do. This is because we all must make our contributions to the collective pool of human knowledge, if there’s a chance someone might like it put it out there, good ideas are worth repeating, and because it will enrich your own life.

On why I don’t write

I grew up reading Harry Potter, Eragon, Lord of the Rings, the Redwall series, Pendragon, Magic Tree House issues #1-#44, the Hunger Games, and countless Star Wars novels. These worlds served as my first introduction to those important themes that pervade our everyday reality: morality, conflict, character, friendship, love. These themes would be my invisible friends growing up, in addition to my stuffed animal buddies of course, and I wouldn’t have traded them for all the Halloween candy in the world.

As a childhood bookworm, I was amazed by my favorite authors more than anything else. The thought that some of these people were able to create an entire other universe baffled me. And not just any old, boring universes either; these stories would suck me out of my car seat or waiting-room chair, and deposit me into the middle of a fantastical drama; one that left my body in the real world stone-like and lifeless, moving only to turn the page or push my falling glasses up my nose. Their words made me feel as if I could be anything. They taught me how complex life can be and showed me the incalculable beauty that is baked-in to every waking moment.

I always envied these writers; to me they were mythical figures, godlike. One day, I took out my wide-ruled notebook and wrote the opening chapter of a fantasy story. But when I reviewed what I had hastily scribbled, I was devastated. The words on the page felt stilted and wholly inadequate. Granted, I was 10 years old, but I wanted so badly to be in the major leagues. In fact, I was nowhere close. Compared to the work of my favorite authors, my story was struggling to even play T-ball.

Out of this comparison grew an insidious self-consciousness. Until a year ago, I kept away from writing pieces of my own. For the longest time my writing made brief cameos in English assignments, short letters to friends, and micro-journal entries scribbled on post-it notes, but appeared nowhere else. Only recently did I entertain the prospect of seeking out the pen and the keyboard to join the ranks of my childhood role-models.

This time however, I think I will succeed. Because this time, instead of setting out to be like my favorite authors, I’m lowering the bar. I’m writing only because I really want to, and because it’s fun. There are still obstacles standing in my path, new ones, but I am determined to plug ahead, like Frodo and Sam scaling the steppes of Mt. Doom.


Sharing is Scary

Still, now I am faced with another dilemma… whether or not to share my work. Staring down the prospect of writing to people I admire, uploading my work to the web, and turning my thoughts into publication, my palms get sweaty. I feel unfit to the task of producing anything worth reading. I don’t like calling myself a writer because it’s a tad presumptuous. To me, publishing your writing is making a statement: that you have something worth hearing. And I’m just not sure that I do, or if I do, that I can communicate it artfully or effectively.

And so I’ve shirked from the very thing that would help me improve… public practice. Instead, I've stockpiled scores of mini-essays in my Evernote app, all unfinished, because I was too afraid to go back and edit them.  But yesterday, I was reminded of the cliche, "every journey must begin with a first step”, for the tenth time too many and I woke up today resolved to publish something. I decided I would finally post an essay no matter how long it would take or how embarrassed I felt over it.

Ironically, I decided the easiest thing to write would be an explanation of why I find it so difficult to write and share my writing. The following paragraphs are my attempt at outlining the various parts within me that have kept me from writing, and the reasons why I feel I must write. The process has been helpful in defining the enemies within myself that stand in my path. I hope that by now naming them I will be better able to conquer them. The exercise has also allowed me to explore those invisible, magnetic forces that continue to pull me back to the QWERTY keys and encouraged me to create.

My hope is that this depiction of my inner creative battle may give you courage in your own. By reading further, you are lending me your support. I’m reminded of being a first-time driver, awkwardly making left turns and bumping curbs in my instructor's vehicle. You are my passenger. I hope that the bumps aren’t too jarring and that it’s a somewhat enjoyable ride. More than anything else I would appreciate your honest feedback. I’m an idealist striving to be a pragmatist, and if you could lend me your opinion, I would love to hear how you think I might improve, whether or not you got anything out of reading what I’ve written, or any other comments you might have. Our time is becoming more and more valuable, and the opportunity cost of reading someone else’s thoughts has never been higher. If you feel like I have wasted your time or that it could have been better spent, please tell me how I might improve so that I can fix my mistakes. It would mean so much to me.

Complexity

If you’ve ever talked with me, you’ll know that my conversations have a tendency to go on for hours. Invariably, my partner and I will start on one track of thought and end up in a completely different one, having visited everywhere in between. In this way, talking with me can sometimes be the mental equivalent of receiving a death-roll in the jaws of a Nile crocodile. You may come up not knowing which way is up or down, unsure of how you got there, and sore from being thrashed all over.

This spin-cycle reflects my inner reality quite well. For me, everything is inter-connected. Give me two wildly different things and my brain will probably come up with ways in which they are related. Like a spiderweb, every word, concept, or object in my mind is a node, with threads tying it to other things, and it’s way to easy for me to get lost or tangled in these currents of interrelatedness.

Walking to the store or folding laundry, my subconscious is constantly generating new ideas. 75% of those ideas are for new projects to start, new things to consume. So not only am I making new connections between existing nodes, I’m adding new nodes to the network. It's a gift and a curse. Life is never boring, but I spend so much time exploring and chasing new ideas that I barely have time to jot them down, let alone form them into coherent sentences, much less a polished final draft. Sometimes it seems I’m always writing first drafts and never fourth ones as the greats often suggest.

More painful than anything else is when I sit down and try to express myself. Like a spigot with too much water trying to rush through too small a hole, my writing is more akin to a random mental ejaculate than a coherent line of thought. For this reason, writing is very hard. It takes me forever to even discover what it is I’m trying to say, let alone convey it in a way that a non-schizoid will understand.

I’ve overcome this obstacle by acknowledging that the grooming process required to take a brainstorm to a workable concept makes me a better thinker. Sometimes I don’t realize the incompleteness of my thoughts on a particular subject until I’ve written all I can write, only to find my mental fabric full of holes. Writing is therefore therapeautic, a way for me to combat my eternal ideological restlessness, to take a step back and appreciate what I currently have, and to take a look around and just be.

yes, the act is sometimes about me trying to figure out my own current thoughts on a topic. in a way it is also bookkeeping. To be able to rifle through the files of my previous mental configurations along thoughts of note for reflection. And the possibilities that ay be born of that reflection are nice.

the paradox of the “final draft"

The difficulty of restricting myself to a single line of thought is compounded by my firmly held belief that there is no such thing as a final draft. I’m the type of person that will proffer a “but what if…” after every attempt to end a discussion or argument. I got too sad when “Star Wars” ended, and so I turned to fan fiction, and spent more time continuing the stories of Han Solo and Jango Feat than I did on the original series. I loved the fact that we can always have the last word, at least in our heads.

I’m of the opinion that objective truth is, for the time being, inaccessible. Instead we must make do with a truth relative to our current understanding and capabilities, a truth that evolves alongside us. Newtonian physics was the "final say" until Special Relativity came along, and how now General Relativity itself may be subsumed by String Theory. Once I saw that even within Science, our most objective film for viewing reality, truth evolves and changes, I resolved to never be certain again. This is called “being a skeptic” and its the safest idealogical stance, to venture outside and make is to open yourself to attack and to be proven wrong. There are endless possibilities and no conversation or person can cover them all.

Writing is cruel, it forces us to limit the conversation, to bottle it up. We have to choose what to leave on the page. And we are typically asked to make a single point. Most of all, the finished work seems to ask of me to have all of my thoughts figured out. To crystallize my thoughts around a certain topic, to admit to having a final form it hardens the fluid nature of my thought process. For me there simply doesn’t exist a single argument, isolated from all others. So by asking my thoughts on one topic you will naturally tend to receive my thoughts on the entire universe, which themselves are subject to change. Thus, any draft I have can never be “final” because I know that in the future I may learn something that will or even just by re-reading realize that what I meant to express was something different entirely.

I know that my death is certain, and that eventually someone will come along and read what I’ve written, and finish the next lines and make the changes. I want to be there when those are written, for some of the drafts I will be around. I want to be there, I want to do it live and see what they will say, to make it a conversation, not a gospel. It’s just never perfect. This has killed many ideas in the bud. In this way just as I can only play a small role in the cosmic history of the universe, I can only contribute to a small part of the human conversation. In that way it’s the selection that’s the hard part, to kill off possibilities and versions that is hard for me.

In this way we are truly absurd. I’ve tried to adopt as much Zen as I possibly can. And tried to see writing, even the process of refining a draft, as a simple step. It’s the process of contributing, even if it is a drop in a vast ocean. It’s better than nothing. I wish to qualify everything I write with “subject to change”. Again, just because we may never get to the final stay, omitting my opinion is preventing others from forming theirs.

Perfectionism

For me my reluctance to mark a draft as “finished” really boils down to perfectionism. It’s difficult for me to articulate my thoughts into a single piece of work. When I do try to make a piece of work, I spawn more and more ideas and don’t ever want to call it quits. I hate to draw a picture and see the vast difference between the beauty reflected in my head and how it translates to the page, or at least know that it could always be better. I know that whatever I publish, if I just spent more time on it, it would be better. No matter how I try the beauty of the thought always seems to pale when placed alongside with the real world, to me it seems an insult and that is almost sacrilegious.

But there are too many reasons to publish it which I will now go over.

Reasons to Write #1 creating as play

As a kid one of my favorite activities was playing with Legos. Over many years, I amassed quite a collection of the trademarked plastic with my allowance. It was my compensation for clearing weeds in the backyard, usually with a large metal hoe. For me, it was quite possibly the best deal ever… I mean when else does a parent give their kid a heavy metal object and say: "I want you to swing this as hard as you can at the plants in our backyard… and I’m gonna pay you for it.” Best of all was the knowledge that after I came inside, sweaty and covered in plant stalks, I would be $3 closer to my next Lego set.

Sometimes I actually followed the instructions to make the structure on each box. But it wouldn’t be long before I found myself tearing apart the structures until they had been reduced to their constituent blocks. I reserved all six wardrobe-sized drawers of our coffee table for the innards of my creations. And on weekends and after school I would sit by the table and combine, destroy, and recombine. There would be bionicle legs attached to starships with harry potter rooftiles acting as plasma vents. Some of my monstrosities I would keep intact for a couple days, but ultimately I would toss them back into the ether of the lego container. My past creations would be consumed and recombined into future creations, fuel only for my mental processes.

Quick aside: In a way we are all like Legos… amalgamations of molecules; slightly varied configurations of the same parts. Instead of harry potter castles and At-At’s the lego blocks of our universe make up dwarf stars, box jellyfish, and mountainous peaks.

I’ve found knowledge to be much the same way as playing with legos. In Sapiens, the author suggests that stories are what allowed us to transcend our lives living among the animals. If stories allowed us to communicate on a large scale. slowly, combining stories with historical accounts and other forms of writing we had been able to stockpile our information and offload it so that things don’t have to be retaught. coming into this world we are babies. We have over time been able to combine human knowledge. None of us has to start from the very beginning and rediscover the wheel or the concept of love again. Instead we can check the trophy case of human history, the drawers of our legos, and withdraw those useful parts for review, for education, and for the formation of new ideas and schools of thought.

anyways… back to writing and the giant ephemeral sack of wisdom that is our collective human consciousness.
Each of us takes in our experiences and reforms them into something that can be seen, a new structure that has not been seen yet. We can in turn consume other people’s structures, change them slightly, repackage them, or take them apart and recombine them with other structures in order to make our own creations. It’s one of the best things we can fill the time of existing. Doing so gives us a deeper understanding of our own mental processes, of the thoughts of others. It’s a worthwhile, and fun, endeavor.

these memes are all there for the taking, ready to be re-arranged and communicated. they’ve been expressed in different  forms numerous times before, echoing through pages of dragons, light and dark, men vs women, dimorphic species… it is the age of information. We are slowly moving beyond the material and into the immaterial, out of the three dimensional spatial reality limited by the rules of physics and into the ephemeral planes of ideas. And it’s just way more fun. And so this is me doing that… i’m playing with the legos. the more i read, the more blocks I add to my lego box. sometimes the box is so full it’s hard to sort through and figure out what’s worth keeping, what’s worth saying. But in the end whether people say they like it or not, it’s still bee n a good time.

Bringing more beauty into the world

I’m that weirdo who gets aesthetic chills every ten seconds, sometimes from the climax of a song, or even a perfectly worded sentence. In that way it’s that consuming art is ultimately pleasurable and hopefully enriching or at least one of the two. Sometimes I get chills from my own random thoughts. I call them epiphanies. One day, a bike rolled past me on campus and as it went I imagined a torque diagram (I was taking Physics at the time) and overplayed over my reality was a series of force vectors as if in a computer simulation. I had to sit down I was so ecstatic. Maybe no one else would find that as gratifying as I did. But there are countless other moments that are just beyond description. For example, the feeling of looking into the eyes of someone you love while at the same time holding the thought that even though you might see this person tomorrow. You will eventually both become a part of the world around us, like a person playing with a set of lego characters you will be tossed back into the lego drawer maybe never to appear in the same configuration again, never to see one another again. But right now you are holding hands, you are body to body with this other person, you could not be closer. The sheer beauty and euphoria of being with somebody you love, with the makes the experience so much more intense. A brief flicker in time. Those sort of moments. The moments that can’t be captured by “Yeah isn’t it such a great day today?”. Like my friends sharing those memes on instagram that make them laugh, it goes back to us sharing the good in life with one another. This is me doing that. I want to articulate it, even if it kills the idea in translation, if only 5% of the general thought can get through, I’m still glad I shared it. So for me, writing is a way for me to express in greater detail, just what exactly I find so great about being alive. Those hidden aspects of reality that never seem to get talked about. Why can’t they be more a part of the global conversation. At the same time as talking about depressive interest rates and bubbles, can we also be talking about the beauty of what’s going on around us. How bout the fact that there’s a financial system at all. Think about the number of factors that had to come together in order for us to form a system for sharing scarce resources that allow self interest for the large part to even combine with the interest of the community, and then what about the implications of our current system, yes best for humans but the environment comes out last, and how might we make it so that merit justifies reward, should the reward even be material? the world is just too complicated but the complexity is in and of itself so beautiful and that’s what I hope to share.

Are these ideas that everyone has? I know that I’m not the only one, but how come this is not what dominates snapchat news. instead I see articles about the kardashians… well that’s cool too… how about the fact that this family has risen to the very top of the western social stratosphere by releasing a tape of Kim engaging in what was formerly and in many places still is an extremely taboo activity. how about the fact that this entire family’s success rests on their genius exploitation of human built in genetic tendencies to gossip as well as the undertones of objectification. That they knowingly objectify themselves and by doing so earn more freedom and power than any of the men or women who follow them could ever dream of acquiring. And then the possibilities of this money, yes, in part they will utilize their power to maintain nd strengthen their image and dominance as cultural leaders, but what is such a person capable of doing, do they have grander more political goals, or is it mostly fluff. Does their manipulative tendency and social intelligence translate to other areas of human interest? These are the questions I want answered. If these are a part of the global conversation they are very hidden.

And that’s how I justify publishing what I consider to be an unfinished work. Because I just don’t see anything exactly like what I’m creating already out there. maybe, just maybe, these words which have helped me dance around a topic, will reach you and in some way improve the quality of your life or see life in a different way. I’m not suggesting that it is the best way of thinking or even completely right, it’s simply another pair of glasses to look through.

 suggest that to anyone feeling the same way, you might take the same journey. To realize that it’s okay. As human beings we are never going to be finished. our work will never be perfect. but if you have the smallest drop of desire in your blood to write, to create, even if you think it is unoriginal, it won’t be… even the oldest ideas retain the same meaning. And I would argue, although it’s a separate issue, that producing is a beautiful thing, if only for yourself, that’s how it starts, but don’t let the fear of sharing stop you or make you change what you’ve written. And then share. the worst that can happen is that someone with completely different life experiences and a completely different brain will come upon it and say no. That’s okay. because you can’t please everyone. And because there is probably someone with the exact opposite disposition who will come along and thank you. You may change their life. And that, is one of the most beautiful experiences a person can have. Or don’t…

Hey look so.etbibg cool

Articulate the more difficult and complicated aspects of the world, that can't be fully encompasses in the phrase

Finally, it’s a form of practice. Life will ask you to work hard either way. You might as well be productive in your free time. Creative work is possibly one of the best ways to achieve the optimal human state of “flow” where you forget all else. In this way it is one of the best deals we have available. Like sex. We are able to take pleasure in the act as well as help others enjoy the same moments and bring them pleasure. This alignment of self-interest with communal interest is one of the rarest occurrences and it ought to be exploited.

It’s mostly out of a burning desire to improve. One of the reasons I consume so much material is that I am always looking for new angles upon the world. The more I read, the more wild and fantastic my thoughts, and conversations become. I feel as if I’m able to grasp more and more of the world around me… or maybe I’m just making it more convoluted. Probably both.

to improve ourselves and the world



For myself, I’m constantly on this Earth consuming ideas trying to discover my place in this world and my thoughts about everything around me. At the same time I’m trying to enjoy the process. We’ve all been gifted with brains that find the very act of learning, of improving fun. One could argue that from an evolutionary perspective it is most adaptive for us to want to get better. To become stronger in those areas we are already strong. To practice, to hone our skills. Back in the old days we might be sharpening our flints and spears or cataloguing the best species of plant for our tribe to eat. Each of us might have taken pride in the fact of contributing something that was uniquely our own. Now that we have evolved out of bands of 30 we face a particularly strange predicament. We are not meant to care about people other than ourselves, much less those beyond our very inner circle. But here we find ourselves sharing space with billions of other humans. We don’t need to help one another out. But the challenges and opportunity are even greater than they ever have been. Instead of being the lone hunter, you can now contribute something even more wholly unique and personalized to your brain. You can find those things that make you excited and take comfort in the fact that you will be providing a service for some small clan of people somewhere else in the world. As Gary Vaynerchuk once said “Smurf it up” you can probably make a worthwhile contribution by smurfing for most of your day. That is a beautiful thing.


to inspire other to create

But then I realize that it’s not about me. Nothing really is as much as our current cultural climate and parents have told us. Humans are interdependent creatures. We cannot bear to be apart from one another. We have only succeeded because of specialization. And so I recognize that I have an obligation to bring forth my own beauty into the world and to try and help others see.

One is to contribute my own thoughts to the human collective. I want to improve… because I’m lucky enough to have parents who told me that I could be anything, who encouraged me to write 10 pages over my 2 page creative writing assignment in 3rd grade to my teacher’s dismay (I mean what 40 year old women wants to read a thousands upon thousands of words about a Dungeons and Dragons character who comes to life?).

Sometimes I find re-occurrences of the same idea, then I know I’m onto something. And I’m grateful for the brilliant moments of discovering a new song. I’ll hunt on soundcloud for hours to try to find a gem with 21 listens and for 3 minutes and 21 seconds my consciousness and life will never be the same afterwards. but it’s the beauty of discovering something new. I realize that some ideas are worth repeating, because times change. contexts change even if the ideas remain static, it becomes something new entirely and needs to be re-expressed. And it heightens that someone will run into that concept at all. Just as Nietzche invented/popularized Existentialism, everyone knew where to find it, the originator and the idea were inseparable but as time drifts along it takes on new meanings and gains new connections. But now you find people who don’t know Nietzche but who know existentialism through some other adapted form of art. through themes in TV and in our very cultural behavior. trying to express these patterns is beautiful.

Another reason I’m drawn to write is out of awe and respect. An homage to those individuals of history, and those still alive, who have gifted me with their wisdom. Who have created fantastical worlds which can provide both a joyous escape from boring moments on the plane or car, at the same time as analogies for our experiences.

it’s my way of giving back.

also because it’s a tradition. I’m grateful for all the creators in my life, they’ve increased it’s richness and complexity and in through those operations, multiplied its beaty exponentially. and to talk the talk you have to walk the walk. maybe by seeing me do my own thing, even if my prose is as awkward as a large halibut flopping around on a deck, I’m still out here, recombining my experiences and repackaging them for others. and maybe, this will be another domino that sends the machinations of your mind tumbling towards sharing whatever amazing creation you have in your head and sharing it… I want to see what you have stored in that noggin!
